Example

you work for an ice cream shop
and make a web app that shows flavors in stock
and allows workers to update.

This is done with a REST API.

The web page communicates with a cloud server
via a REST API

What is a REST API

Representational
State
Transfer

(ReST)

(it's a design pattern for web apps basically)

They are about communication (client-server model)

a Restful service is a service that uses rest apis
to communicate

- standardized approach so everyone knows kinda what is
happening.

- standardized requests!

- scalable and stateless so no strange bugs or tracking data

- high performance because there is cache support
(fetched pages can be cached by frequency)

so we have an api that might look like this

http://icecream/api/flavors

api represents the root tree for our endpoint domain

flavors here represents what is known as a resource

main building blocks:

Request sent from client to server
Response received from the server

CRUD stands for the actions:

Create, Read, Update, Delete

These actions are common in client-server communication

On a REST API the equivalent to these are called HTTP methods
or operations

Create is equivalent to post

Read is equivalent to get

Update is put

Delete is delete

A request would look like an operation, an endpoint, 
and might have some parameters or body, which are the changes
that we might want to make (data in the request)

It also includes Headers (this is particular to the REST API
and might include API keys and authentication)

What might be in a response? Responses are typically JSON
data.

Say we want to display what is currently in stock:

get /api/flavors -> response returns an array of flavors.

put /api/flavors/1 "chocolate" -> replace 1 with flavor
chocolate.

post api/flavors "restful raspberry" -> create new flavor.

This can obviously be coupled with a nice front end so people
don't go crazy.

Spring Beginner to Guru

fonte no git









